---
title: Journal for Week 2
categories: journal entry
---

###Current plan for the week
1. (Monday) Cleaning up IVPTestSuite/adding new non stiff test
  + Add the PLEI test case from Hairer
  + Tidy up IVPTestSuite/src/ODE
  + Decide on which implicit solver to work on for JuliaCon
  + Blog post recapping the first week
2. (Tuesday) Run `pwl`'s PR on IVPTestSuite
  + Compare performance of solvers as represented in `pwl/ODE.jl` and `JuliaLang/ODE.jl`
  + Produce performance comparison graphs
3. (Tuesday/Wednesday-Saturday) Singly focus on implementing implicit and adaptive Adam Bashforth. 
  + Main Goal: A functional or near-functional version of the solver by week's close
  + If time permits, run through IVPTestSuite
4. (Saturday) A Blog post recapping the second week 

###Journal entry: #6
* Unforunately, a good portion of the day and late night were spent debugging code
* I spent a far amount of time today trying to clean up ODE.jl in IVPTestSuite. I first tried scraping the metaprograming, however, I found that the metaprogramming was necessary in order to achieve the desired functionality of being able to `use IVPTestSuite`, and call a ODE solver instance with, for example, Solvers.ode23s. It seems removing the mesy metaprogramming may be repectifully sizable. 
* Another focus today was adding a new test case to IVPTestSuite. I choose the PLEI problem, described on pg 245 of Hairer. The problem is almost completely ready, I was have been going through the testing and debugging stage.
* I also attempted to run pwl's PR locally. I was not able to get the Winston package working properly to render graphs. I think I would like to see I can tomorrow.
* I ultimately decided to work on the adaptive and implicit Adam Bashforth solver, and will plan to present this one during JuliaCon. I figured it would be nice to finish with all things Adam Bashforth, having already code the fixed step explicit and implement methods. Also, I am confident I can get a near production ready version of AB out by JuliaCon, but I think it is best not to rush the RADAUIIA methods.

###Journal entry: #7
* Finished adding PLEI test case, and the ob/plei branch of IVPTestSuite.jl is passing Travis build. Just need to finish up the header documentation of the new test case tomorrow
* Started migrating IVPTestSuite.jl's plotting package from Winston to PyPlot. After sometime, was able to finally plot some performance results of solvers. Also, I was able to run initial tests on the JuliaLang/ODE.jl release versus pwl's PR. Currently, the performance of the pull request version seems quite a bit worse than the current ODE.jl release. For example, on `threebody`, the release's version of `ode4` runs test 5 of six with specs `sig. digits= 3.273585154893643, walltime= 2.245735044s, memory= 365.0MB
`. `pwl`'s version runs test 5 of 6 with the following specs `Running test 5 of 6:
 sig. digits= -0.00894961245245218, walltime= 293.201146862s, memory= 160263.0MB`. I'll rerun these tests tomorrow.
* Submitted title and abstract for my JuliaCon talk coming up in almost exactly three weeks. 
  - Title:  A Review of a Recently Implemented Implicit and Adaptive ODE Solver based on Adam-Bashforth-Multon Methods
  - Abstract: ODE.jl is an ever increasing store house of numerical solvers of ordinary differential equations. While many solvers are currently found in ODE.jl, there are still many which are awaiting a native Julia implementation in the package (especially implicit solvers for stiff ODEs). Here we review an implicit and adaptive step-size solver based on the Adam-Bashforth-Multon method, recently implemented in Julia, but still awaiting final revisions before merging into ODE.jl. Performance results of the solver using the IVPTestSuite.jl are also presented.
* Also spent a little more time working with the metaprogramming to see if we can have a cleaner IVPTestSuite/src/solvers/ODE.jl file. Once again, I couldn't find a cleaner way to implementing this than how it is already implemented in `master`. I'll move on from this until I can talk with my mentor @mauro3 about what to do. 
* Tomorrow will start the implicit and adaptive Adam Bashforth implementation. I'll pretty excited for it!
 
###Journal entry: #8
* Quickly added header documentation to PLEI test case on the ob/plei branch of IVPTestSuite.jl
* Started implementing the adaptive Adam Bashforth explicit and implicit solvers, on ob/a-b_adaptive branch of obiajulu/ODE.jl. This first meant making sure I understand how these solvers worked, and deciding what overarching structure to set. I followed the implemenation described in Hairer's III.5 and III.7, where the order of the next step is determined in the same manner as it is for the adaptive Adams solver DEABM. A few steps still remain to be coded tomorrow, and testing will follow. The goal is to have a preliminary version of both solvers. 
* Further testing of @pwl's PR with IVPTestSuite.jl was not pursued today, in favor of focusing mostly on the adaptive Adam solvers. Though, I hope I will be able to discuss the topic, as well as a general vision for where to take IVPTestSuite.jl, with my mentor tomorrow during our Thursday Skype call. 

###Journal entry: #8
* Continued work on explicit DEABM-like solver (see Hairer III.7 pg 423-426 for description of DEABM). After finishing up the first-round coding for the explicit solver, I started testing with a [simple ODE](https://gist.github.com/obiajulu/410c8745ce9c633966f95e6a2b659e07). After much debugging, I was able to get the solver to [output a solution](https://drive.google.com/file/d/0B2oRp-nVYvzGb0pzUmR6bkdRMm8/view?usp=sharing), however it is not [the correct one](https://drive.google.com/file/d/0B2oRp-nVYvzGa0RobFNBYV9ZdGM/view?usp=sharing). There are many potential places for off-by-one errors or mistakes in arithematic, both of which could contribute to the bug. I will continue to look for the source tomorrow. Once I get to the bottom of it, it should not take much to move on to the implicit adaptive method using a PECE method (this is the same method I used for the fixed step implicit AB solver I implemented last week).
* Also, the Skype with @mauro3 planned for today was moved to tomorrow. All the better, as we'll have even more to talk about. 

